Explain requesting and prompting users for host_permissions (#27566)
mdn/content: files/en-us/mozilla/add-ons/webextensions/manifest.json/host_permissions/index.md

Use the `host_permissions` key to request access for the APIs in your extension that read or modify host data, such as {{WebExtAPIRef("cookies")}}, {{WebExtAPIRef("webRequest")}}, and {{WebExtAPIRef("tabs")}}. This key is an array of strings, and each string is a request for a permission.

### Requested permissions and user prompts

Most browsers treat `host_permission` as optional. If you request permissions using this key, users _may_ get prompted to grant those permissiosns during installation. As of June 2023, Safari, Firefox, and some Chromium-based browsers don't prompt the user during installation.

> User can also grant or revoke host permissions on an ad hoc basis. For example, in Firefox, users can do this using the [extensions panel](https://blog.mozilla.org/addons/2022/11/17/unified-extensions-button-and-how-to-handle-permissions-in-manifest-v3/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can also grant or revoke host permissions on an ad hoc basis. For example, in Firefox, users can do this using the [extensions panel](https://blog.mozilla.org/addons/2022/11/17/unified-extensions-button-and-how-to-handle-permissions-in-manifest-v3/).
```

Use the `host_permissions` key to request access for the APIs in your extension that read or modify host data, such as {{WebExtAPIRef("cookies")}}, {{WebExtAPIRef("webRequest")}}, and {{WebExtAPIRef("tabs")}}. This key is an array of strings, and each string is a request for a permission.

### Requested permissions and user prompts

In most browsers, `host_permission` requests are treated as optional, and fully under the user's control.

> If you request permissions using this key, the browser _may_ prompt the user to grant the extension access to this host data at install time. Currently Safari, Firefox, and some configurations of Chromium-based browsers don't prompt the user during installation.

Reviewer: @zombie  the second sentence seems to contradict:

- https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/permission-request-messages-firefox-extensions?as=u&utm_source=inproduct#w_access-your-data-for-a-specific-site
- https://extensionworkshop.com/documentation/develop/request-the-right-permissions/#avoid-unnecessary-permissions (under Avoid host permission "<all_urls>" if you can)

> Whether the user is prompted and grants permissions or not, most browsers allow the user to control the extension's host permissions after installation: grant or revoke them as needed.

Reviewer: Do we have some that explains how to use it does this. Is it: https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/questions/1267539

Author: We have a blog post, which also links to a SuMo page, but the link seems to have changed (I'll track it down and update the blog post):
* https://blog.mozilla.org/addons/2022/11/17/unified-extensions-button-and-how-to-handle-permissions-in-manifest-v3/
* https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/extensions-button

Author: Not sure if it's appropriate to link to user-facing Firefox-specific instructions on MDN?

> In most browsers, `host_permission` requests are treated as optional, and fully under the user's control.
> 
> If you request permissions using this key, the browser _may_ prompt the user to grant the extension access to this host data at install time. Currently Safari, Firefox, and some configurations of Chromium-based browsers don't prompt the user during installation.
> 
> Whether the user is prompted and grants permissions or not, most browsers allow the user to control the extension's host permissions after installation: grant or revoke them as needed.
> 
> To account for different possible states, you should use the {{WebExtAPIRef("permissions", "permissions API")}}. Specifically you can check if you have all the required permissions after installation using {{WebExtAPIRef("permissions.contains")}}. Depending on your specific use case, you could have an onboarding step to explain why some permissions are necessary, and request them using {{WebExtAPIRef("permissions.request")}}.

Reviewer: @zombie looking at this again, holistically and hopefully incorporating your feedback on my comments, does this work for you:

```suggestion
Most browsers treat `host_permission` requests as optional. This means users don't get prompted to grant this permission during installation. Rather, the user can grant or revoke host permissions on an ad hoc basis. For example, in Firefox, users do this using the [extensions button](https://blog.mozilla.org/addons/2022/11/17/unified-extensions-button-and-how-to-handle-permissions-in-manifest-v3/). In browsers that, don't treat the permission as optional, often users can also grant or revoke permission on an ad hoc basis.

As of June 2023, Safari, Firefox, and some Chromium-based browsers treat this permission as optional and don't prompt the user during installation.

Your extension can check whether it has all the required permissions immediately after installation using {{WebExtAPIRef("permissions.contains")}}. If it doesn't have the necessary permissions, it can request them using {{WebExtAPIRef("permissions.request")}}. Providing an onboarding step to explain why some permissions are necessary before requesting them might also be helpful.
```

Reviewer: @zombie perhaps we should include a note in the BCD about whether the permission is treated as optional  or required, rather than including it here?

Author: Sorry, I understand this is pretty confusing.

1) I believe that all major browsers (meaning Firefox, Safari and Chrome/Edge/...) threat `host_permissions` as optional and user-controllable.  My only reason for using "most" instead was just in case others I haven't tested/am not familiar with behave differently.

2) Separately, that fact from (1) does not correlate 1:1 with browsers which prompt for permissions during install.  Currently Firefox and Safari don't, while most chromium configurations do.  We (Firefox) also plan to change this in the next few months, and the answer will probably not be a simple: "does it prompt: yes/no", as we'll probably only prompt in some situations.

This part of the behavior is up to the browser (and perhaps user) to choose, and is likely to change, so I don't think it would be useful to try to be precise which browser prompt or not, and I'm not sure a BCD entry would be very useful either.

So my suggestions is to keep it a bit vague, as the recommended behavior for extension developers ultimately doesn't depend on which browsers prompt during install, they should be prepared to react to any amount of granted permissions, from zero to all requested.

(Your second part is great, much clearer than my original text!)

Author: I updated to mash my version with your suggestions, let me know if this works.

Reviewer: Thanks @zombie I fixed one small typo, but otherwise we look good to merge, so I have

> To account for different possible states, you should use the [permissions API](/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/permissions). Specifically you can check if you have all the required permissions after installation using [permissions.contains](/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/permissions/contains). Depending on your specific use case, you could have an onboarding step to explain why some permissions are necessary, and request them using [permissions.request](/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/permissions/request).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To account for different possible states, you should use the {{WebExtAPIRef("permissions", "permissions API")}}. Specifically you can check if you have all the required permissions after installation using {{WebExtAPIRef("permissions.contains")}}. Depending on your specific use case, you could have an onboarding step to explain why some permissions are necessary, and request them using {{WebExtAPIRef("permissions.request")}}.
```

Suggestion to use special syntax that takes care of using the correct link and formatting.
